# Visual Analytics SoSe 2026 - Exercise 5

Author: Suvansh Shukla  
Matriculation Number: 256245

## Question 1

Biclustering is an unsupervised machine learning task that simultaneously groups rows (observations) and columns (attributes) of
a data matrix. Being an unsupervised approach, it does not rely on ground truth or use labeled observations.[^1]

It can be used for the following:

1. clustering time series
2. modeling network data

Basically it means that unlike K-means or DBSCAN that would find clusters on the data overall, Biclustering would find clusters in on
subsets of rows and columns not just the entire dataset.

Example:

```markdown
|        | Cond 1 | Cond 2 | Cond 3 | Cond 4 | Cond 5 |
| ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |
| Gene A | 10     | 11     | 12     | 3      | 4      |
| Gene B | 9      | 10     | 11     | 2      | 3      |
| Gene C | 1      | 2      | 3      | 20     | 21     |
| Gene D | 2      | 3      | 4      | 19     | 20     |

One bicluster might be:

Rows: Gene A, Gene B
Columns: Cond 1, Cond 2, Cond 3

Another bicluster might be:

Rows: Gene C, Gene D
Columns: Cond 4, Cond 5

Notice that each cluster is associated with its own subset of columns.

Traditional clustering generally misses this because it evaluates similarity across the entire feature set.
```

## Question 2

The basic problem that should be solved when visualizing biclusters is their **overlap**. Three bicluster visualization techniques are[^2]:

1. Heatmaps: These are two-dimensional visualization techniques that display values of data in a matrix.
2. Parallel coordinates: this technique is a visualization technique used to plot high-dimensional multivariate data. Each dimension corresponds to a vertical axis and each data element is posted as a series of connected points forming a *polyline* along the defined axes.
3. Bubble maps: Consists of drawing biclusters as circles (bubbles). A color represents a group of biclusters generated by a biclustering algorithm.

## Question 3

Scatter plots can be used for the following[^3]:

1. Examine the relationship between two variables.
2. Check for outliers and unusual observations.
3. Create a time series plot with irregular time-dependent data.
4. Evaluate the fit of a regression model.

## Question 4

When we have lots of data points to plot, this can run into the issue of overplotting. Overplotting is the case where data points overlap to a degree where we have difficulty seeing relationships between points and variables. It can be difficult to tell how densely-packed data points are when many of them are in a small area.[^4]

There are a few common ways to alleviate this issue. One alternative is to sample only a subset of data points: a random selection of points should still give the general idea of the patterns in the full data. We can also change the form of the dots, adding transparency to allow for overlaps to be visible, or reducing point size so that fewer overlaps occur. As a third option, we might even choose a different chart type like the heatmap, where color indicates the number of points in each bin. Heatmaps in this use case are also known as 2-d histograms.[^4]

---

## References

[^1]: Eduardo N Castanho, Helena Aidos, Sara C Madeira, Biclustering data analysis: a comprehensive survey, Briefings in Bioinformatics, Volume 25, Issue 4, July 2024, bbae342, https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbae342
[^2]: Aouabed, H., Elloumi, M. & Santamaría, R. (2021). An evaluation study of biclusters visualization techniques of gene expression data. Journal of Integrative Bioinformatics, 18(4), 20210019. https://doi.org/10.1515/jib-2021-0019
[^3]: https://statisticsbyjim.com/graphs/scatterplots/#:~:text=Use%20scatterplots%20to%20assess%20the%20following%20features%20of%20your%20dataset
[^4]: https://www.atlassian.com/data/charts/what-is-a-scatter-plot#:~:text=Overplotting
